ABRAHAM LINCOLN: THE PEOPLE'S LEADER IN THE STRUGGLE FOR NATIONAL EXISTENCE

By GEORGE HAVEN PUTNAM, LITT. D.
Author of "Books and Their Makers in the Middle Ages," "The Censorship of the Church," etc.

With the above is included the speech delivered by Lincoln in New York, February 27, 1860;
with an introduction by Charles C. Nott, late Chief Justice of the Court of Claims, and
annotations by Judge Nott and by Cephas Brainerd of New York Bar.

1909

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The twelfth of February, 1909, was the hundredth anniversary of the birth of Abraham Lincoln.
In New York, as in other cities and towns throughout the Union, the day was devoted to
commemoration exercises, and even in the South, in centres like Atlanta (the capture of which
in 1864 had indicated the collapse of the cause of the Confederacy), representative Southerners
gave their testimony to the life and character of the great American.

The Committee in charge of the commemoration in New York arranged for a series of addresses
to be given to the people of the city and it was my privilege to be selected as one of the
speakers. It was an indication of the rapid passing away of the generation which had had to
do with the events of the War, that the list of orators, forty-six in all, included only four
men who had ever seen the hero whose life and character they were describing.

I had assumed that the report of my own address would be preserved in the columns of
the Tribune and, with a copy of that report in hand, I had planned to prepare from it
a revised narrative for my friends. I found, however, that the report had been garbled and
that the portion submitted to me was so inaccurate that I could not work from it. I had no
alternative but to sit down and reproduce from memory the address which I had delivered
without notes and of which, of course, I had preserved no record. In doing this, I was able
to recall the main points of the argument and the facts on which it was based. I wrote out
the address and, as it seemed to me that the presentation might be of interest to others
than my immediate friends, I sent it to the New York History Society for publication
in their Proceedings. I received a courteous acknowledgment from the secretary,
who informed me that the paper would be published in an early issue.